[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think what was the
most inspiring possibility
of starting Green School is the
challenge that John and I always
put ourselves against,
which is, "Can we do this?"
Of course, we can.
There was an opportunity there.
There was a need for
a holistic school.
>> Let's go and help.
Let's go and see.
Let's go and be part of this.
We drew people from
all over the planet
to make Green School a reality.
>> Educating the kids for
generations to come is important
to me because they
are the future.
And let's work at
having a better planet.
Let's work at taking
responsibility
for the limited resources
that we have left.
Let's be responsible
around our decisions.
[BELL RINGS]
[CHILDREN CHATTERING]
>> What does
education really mean?
We usually think
about it as the system
that gives us information
relevant to our growth
into adulthood or to our
continuous professional
formation.
I believe the roots of education
start in our collective culture
and within our families.
They are unique to
each part of the world
and to the set of values that
are ingrained in a country's
culture.
In this episode, we want to look
at both the limiting factors
and the empowering
factors of education.
This way, we can
reflect more honestly
about what it takes to build
a new educational system that
truly reflects what we
want to see in the world.
This is about empowering
every child and every adult
to live their lives to the
fullest of what they came here
for.
A young child is
like a blank canvas,
full of curiosity and
potential and keen
to discover the
surrounding environment.
In my view, we all
come to this world
with a unique set of skills.
If an education system
can enable every child
to discover their own gifts
and to lean into those gifts,
then we can also
move towards a world
where every human being gets
to do what they actually enjoy,
what they are naturally good at.
I first visited the Green
School in Bali a few years ago.
And what captured my
attention right away
were the conversations I had
with children of different ages.
It was clear that
they were engaged,
enthusiastic, and also very
mature in their thinking.
The Green School is
an example of a school
that is learning itself from
different education systems.
They bring parts of
separate models together
and they always focus on
experiential learning.
The kids I met at
the Green School
were all involved in different
entrepreneurial projects.
They also felt empowered to take
charge of their own learning
process.
All ideas were welcome as long
as the kids themselves figured
out how to make it happen.
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
>> So I was always raised as
someone who cared for the Earth
and the environment.
I was raised as a skier
and an athlete also,
and I was always outdoors.
So being exposed to
environmental education,
it was a first sort of communal
class that I had ever taken,
and it was an eye-opener and
hugely awakening for all of us
in terms of how we could make
a tremendous difference, one
person at a time, through a
passionate commitment of getting
behind a cause.
And I could have easily,
happily stayed there,
but I had this hankering
feeling, this gnawing,
passionate need to travel and
to do something different.
And I was always
like a risk-taker.
But for us, it felt, especially
for John, like we weren't done.
We were still young and
we had a lot of drive.
And there was a lot of
support from the community,
from the greater community,
to build a holistic school.
>> I wanted them to go to a
school that was beautiful.
I wanted them to go to
a school that was happy.
We talked about it and I
said, let's start a school.
[SOFT MUSIC]
[CHILDREN CHATTERING]
You're in the heart of
school, and it is just that.
The architect came and did
a little Plasticine model.
It was a rectangle.
And I said, what is it?
And he said it's the
administration complex.
And I rolled the
Plasticine like this.
We had an amazing building
called Aldo Kitchen made
from da Vinci's helicopter.
So one da Vinci helicopter
going like this.
One da Vinci helicopter
going like that.
And then in the middle, the
da Vinci helicopters did this.
And that's what
you've got right here,
is the two da Vinci helicopters
curling back on each other.
But it was one of the biggest
bamboo buildings ever built.
People knew what Green
School looked like.
And there weren't any mistakes.
If somebody called a
concrete box a Green School,
people went, no, no, that's
not the Green School.
The Green School is made
from bamboo and it's in Bali.
>> We wanted to create a school
that would feel like home
for everybody.
Home for the parents.
Home for the kids.
Home for the teachers
to really build
a community of loving people,
caring about one another
in a very meaningful way.
Most schools don't
provide a safe venue
for kids who are learning
different to process well.
So Green School welcomes a lot
of learning different kids.
It's another challenge
at Green School.
It's a beautiful challenge.
You have such a wonderful blend
of incredibly gifted children.
And the teachers
at Green School are
teaching to children's
strengths, which
means if your child is not
doing well in a subject,
they must be doing well
in another subject.
And let's pull that
out of your child
and let's allow your child to
go home confident and feeling
proud every day.
So that's really what
we wanted to create.
We wanted to create a family.
If you can create the
opportunity for a child
to understand what gratitude is
and exercise it on a daily basis
with their parents,
that's really, truly
the making of
phenomenal human beings.
Because what's more
important to this world
than having people that are
actually paying attention
to what is in the moment,
living in the moment,
and understanding it and
having an appreciation for it?
That is only acquired
by reflection
at the end of the day.
The kids are passionate
about the planet.
The kids are interested in a
light footprint in their lives.
And the kids are interested
in integrity and respect
and community and creativity.
They know what it is to have
been loved during the time they
were at school by the
teachers, by the community,
by their family.
It takes a real act of
passionate commitment
for a family to pick
up and leave a country
to move here for the sake of
their children's education.
One of our recent graduates
started a little movement
called Jungalow Ecosystem.
They're encouraging people to
build forests in their homes,
in their gardens--
examples of how humans can
begin incorporating forests
into everything we do.
Not only do these trees provide
a cooler and cleaner environment
to play in, but they
also add extra elements
of imagination, creativity,
and fun of all sorts of games
to be played.
Not to mention trees
have been proven
to have great benefits
to the mental health
and well-being of kids.
So these Green School
kids are really
into making the world a
better place, tree by tree,
plant by plant, ecosystem by
ecosystem, one drop of water
after another.
It's really amazing and
remarkable that all of the Green
School grads are really
committed to making
the world a better place.
>> Improving our education
system is not just about
intangible benefits to society.
For every dollar spent
on improving early child
development, the return
can be more than $8.
And this return-to-cost ratio
is highest in early childhood.
In my entrepreneurial
activities,
I often meet people who study
through the Montessori method.
Montessori paved the way ahead
for many alternative education
approaches.
And like a lot of
the big innovations
that address
problems at the roots
of how society functions,
Montessori has also
had to open people's minds
to an alternative approach
to education.
Critique is inevitable when
we're changing the status quo.
And all alternative
education methods
have to deal with critique.
On that note, I do not
think it is a coincidence
that a relatively high
proportion of entrepreneurs
went through education
systems like Montessori.
Doing things differently and
questioning our environments
are key entrepreneurial skills.
And these methods usually
support a questioning
perspective of the status quo.
>> Kids, from the time
they were very little,
are farming in the rice
fields at Green School.
They're planting vegetables.
They're harvesting
the vegetables.
They've got a worm farm.
They're composting.
We have pigs on campus.
We have cows on campus.
The waste goes to the pigs.
The cows create compost
for the gardens.
There's a recycling
program where
families bring in their plastic
and their glass and their metal.
And the kids are involved at
every level with all of this.
I think the teachers
at Green School
are working closely
with the kids
to enable the kids to create
this innate sense of curiosity
about everything
that surrounds them,
everything that they're
up against, everything
they're confronted with.
They have an extreme
sense of curiosity
and don't just come
and judge things,
but they're really
wanting to know
what is the nature of
what's in front of me
and how could I dissect it?
>> We came from a womb.
We lived in a cave.
We didn't live in a box.
And Green School is matriarchal.
Green School is a womb, a
nest, a protective environment
with very little right
angle and materials
that are so, so
friendly, and a tree
going through the classroom
that moves sometimes and makes
a noise.
So when you get into a
Green School classroom
and you sit down at a desk,
which can be a straight row,
can be a crooked
row, can be an oval,
you start to control
your own environment.
And it really changes how you
think about the future, how
you think about life.
>> The school integrates
the local rituals,
insofar as one day a week, the
entire campus is wearing pakaian
adat, which is traditional
Balinese dress.
There's different rituals.
At 2:00, there's a
gong that sounds.
And no matter what one is
doing, if in the middle--
you're in the middle of
a conversation or writing
something or you're in
the toilet or anywhere,
you stop for one minute and take
a moment of mindful meditation.
>> Countries and families shape
our education at the root.
They imprint in us certain
ways of looking at the world.
In my own journey, I've
done a lot of questioning
of these perspectives.
If they are empowering
and rooted in love,
rooted in a caring
perspective of the world,
then I find that they
tend to be supportive of
our personal evolution as well.
But if they come from
judgment and fear,
I have learned that I do
better without having them
in my default settings.
Taking perspectives
on the judgments
that our cultures or families
have about the world is hard.
If we are immersed in a certain
culture environment where
everybody operates
in a certain way,
we just don't know
anything else.
That is why traveling
opens our minds.
We suddenly realize that other
people live their reality
in completely different ways and
through their own set of values.
Becoming aware of
that empowers us
to understand that we can
choose those values too.
So in a slightly more
micro way, the uniqueness
of our country's culture
is also reflected
in our family of origin.
When we are children,
the education
we receive directly from our
parents has a lot of weight.
As we start growing up,
we can see more clearly
how other people have
different perspectives built
into the way they
look at the world.
Noticing that can make
us question our beliefs.
I find that these questioning
process starts clearly
with the typical
teenage rebellion phase,
but it can then continue
in a healthy way as adults.
We can always
challenge our judgments
when they're not serving us.
We can replace actions
coming from fear with actions
rooted in love and wisdom.
That is ongoing self-education.
>> Green School, for us, was an
ability for us to demonstrate
our gratitude to Bali by
building something that was
so light on the land and
so phenomenally beautiful.
>> The Green School architecture
was influenced certainly by Bali
and the culture of Bali.
We didn't have to go and
tear down a mountain,
we didn't have to go
and dig up a hole,
and we didn't have to go
and kill the last tree.
Green School architecture is
renewable and it's amazing.
I look at the
buildings 15 years on
and the buildings are
still proud and strong.
And they'll be there as
long as we change the roof.
And after a few
years, we started
to get local people choosing
to send their children to Green
School.
But we had an incredible mix.
We had kids from farms.
We had kids from villages.
We had an amazing group of kids.
And one day, a guy named Tim
Fijal came to me and said,
"John, we're not doing enough."
And I went, "Tim, what do you
mean we're not doing enough?"
He said, "We're not doing
enough for the Balinese kids.
You've built all
these buildings which
are inhabited eight
or nine hours a day,
245 days of the year.
What about the local kids?
And so Tim started something
called the Kul Kul Connection.
And it eventually
grew to a group
of 300 kids came after school.
The local school was on shift.
And they learned English,
environmentalism, and computer.
And when you see
these kids today,
they are completely different.
They had their regular school
and then they had Green School.
And one thing that happened
when Indonesia was on fire,
started to ask questions
about the smoke.
They sold t-shirts,
they sold food,
and they got enough money to
fly to Irian Jaya and work with
activists there, asking the
question of their people,
of their Indonesian people,
"Why are we burning the forest?"
And that's like, wow, this
was-- for most of these kids,
this was their first
time on a plane,
but they didn't go
to Disney World.
They went to Kalimantan
and asked questions that
are really important questions.
"Why are we burning the
forest?" is a big thing.
>> I think if you're interested
in promoting educational
sustainability in
your own communities,
it's important to be in
community and to know who
your community is and speak
with a voice of the community.
And if that involves
going to the schools, who
is or isn't the
community because it's
a different kind
of union or group?
I think the power of
community is something that's
important and significant
and can be heard
as long as it stands united.
I think what happens
in the long term
with these kids, these young
adults who are becoming adults,
is that they have an
extremely powerful sense
of self-confidence and a desire
to make the world a better place
and do that by their own
demonstrative living.
>> Road to Utopia as a series
is all about opening our minds
to positive different ways of
building the kind of world we
would actually be
excited to live in.
Education is at the core
of this because everything
starts with the perspective
we look at the world through.
That perspective comes from
our environment, our families,
and our education systems.
We are the ones in charge
of expanding and updating
our perspectives.
We have that power.
Now, as it turns out, the
current educational system
in Western society was
built through the Industrial
Revolution, almost
200 years ago,
with a factory machine
approach designed
to produce uniform units.
Same education, same tasks,
same model for everybody.
But the world we live in today
is so multifaceted and complex.
Diversity is more
than a birthright.
It is also immensely
valuable to building
a society we love living in.
I believe personalized
and experiential education
models like the Green
School are our future.
And I can't wait to see more
education in this space.
>> I think that Green School
could go anywhere in the world
where you've got a passionate
community of engaged learners,
students and parents that
want to make a community,
that want to have an environment
where the kids are really
engaged and really happy
and experiencing education
in a really well-built
beautiful environment,
not a traditional
institutional framework.
>> The Green School has
changed my life and changed
my perspective.
I went from being a
pretty damaged individual
from the school system to being
fully excited about education
and fully excited
about the Green School.
It's producing
incredible results.
And we thought we'd have
to wait for 25 years,
but we didn't have to do that.
Our kids started doing things in
grade eight, grade seven, grade
six that changed the world.
So it happened much more
quickly than I ever expected.
And it happened in a
very incredible way.
Green School produces
amazing human beings.
>> As long as we
have here in Bali,
we are committed to making a
difference and growing things.
The school was an interesting
growth opportunity just
to plant a flagpole
on the land of Bali
saying that this is a great
example of what might be.
It wasn't meant
to be the end all,
but it was meant to be
a catalyst for change
around the world with
holistic education.
It's about building
with local materials.
sustainably, something beautiful
and something that is serving
a need of a community.
[SOFT MUSIC]